What is a best case timeline for an
actual manned Mars mission? If there's
political will behind it, the tech is
there.
>> 10 years. 10 years. [music] 10 years is
realistic.
>> Yes, I think if we put our effort to it,
we'll see it in our lifetime. Could even
be in 10 years.
We're going [music] back to the moon for
the first time in more than 50 years. 5
4 3
>> [music]
>> 2 1 liftoff.
And this time, we're planning to do a
lot more than [music] just plant a flag.
And it's not just NASA that's involved.
Billionaires like Elon Musk have their
own role and their own big plans for
space [music] travel. Having factories
on the moon,
building AI satellites. We can use the
moon as a rocket fuel depot to go to the
rest of the solar system. But, is the
United States really capable of
colonizing outer space? NASA's return to
the moon is delayed [music] again. A new
problem with the Artemis 2 rocket. My
guest this week thinks it's our destiny.
[music]
He's an entrepreneur, pilot, and
astronaut, and he's leading NASA into
[music] an ambitious new era. Back at
home, we all have a lot of work to do,
but from here, Earth sure looks like a
perfect world.
Jared Isaacman,
>> [music]
>> welcome to Interesting Times. Great to
be here. Thank you. No, it's great to be
here. Yes.
>> So, we we asked for a secret test
facility buried under the Rockies, and
we're not there, but we are in We got
close. We're in the woods of Maryland
behind several gates marked don't pass
ongoing testing, and we're under this.
What is this? So, we're in the
spacecraft magnetic test facility.
So, this is where we calibrate
spacecraft, satellites before they go up
into orbit, where we need to take
extremely precise measurements. Space
weather would be a good example of it.
So, yes, it is rather
incredible. And even though this
facility has been around for some time,
it still kind of points you towards the
future in some ways, doesn't it? Right.
So, and but if this starts up, we we
both get catapulted into a parallel
dimension, right? At at at at some point
in the podcast.
>> I was about to just go in and make a
joke on that, but I'll I'll I'll refrain
and just say we'll probably be just
safely exited out of the room before
that happens.
>> That's That's That's the safer answer.
We'll We'll see how it goes. Um Keep the
humor to a minimum these days. on the
subject. [laughter]
Well, we'll we'll we'll we'll get to
Yeah, we'll get to some of those those
questions at the end. But, um Goddard is
also home to NASA's newest telescope,
right? Which has not yet been launched.
Correct. Tell me about that.
>> Sure. So, uh Nancy Grace Roman Telescope
is in the clean room here. Now,
this is a really exciting mission
because if everybody knows Hubble,
uh everybody knows the James Webb Space
Telescope as well, and people are about
to know the Nancy Grace Roman Telescope.
And the reason why is it has nearly 100
uh times the field of view of
of Hubble and upwards of 1,000 times the
scan rate.
Uh so, that's pretty exciting when you
think about how much science that
instrument is going to be able to do
compared to the assets we already have
up there. Okay. Well, that's something
to look forward to. Let's talk about you
for a minute before we go back to NASA.
You're a billionaire, an entrepreneur.
Sorry, you you look slightly pained when
when I said that, but you are.
Um you ran a financial tech company, an
aviation defense contractor, and you're
also an astronaut.
Um I think you're the first private
citizen to do a spacewalk. Is that
right?
Uh so, I've um
I've been to space twice. Uh so, on a uh
uh on a Falcon 9 Dragon spacecraft, the
exact same way that NASA astronauts send
our astronauts to and from space. The
first mission
uh was in September 2021. So, led the
first all-civilian mission to orbit. And
then uh also in September of 2024,
uh my crew and I, we went farther into
space than anyone's gone since last time
we walked on the moon. We tested out new
form of communication using satellite
laser links. We we communicated over
beam of light between our spaceship and
the the Starlink constellations. All in
the idea of trying to build towards an
exciting future where lots of people are
living and working in space. We're going
to the moon and Mars. And when you get
there, you're going to probably need to
get outside the safety of your habitat
and go explore and discover and repair
and build things. And you're going to
need lots of space suits in order to do
that. So, I've been very lucky.
>> What is it like
to be in space?
500 words or less. Well, I would just
say everything initially feels
different. Going into microgravity is
There's no There's no roller coaster
here on Earth to, you know, no, you
know, chamber we can put you in to feel
what it's like. You know, there's a
fluid shift in your body basically
without without gravity. Fluid in your
face, you know, in your body kind of
gravitate towards up towards your head.
So, at first, everybody has this
chipmunk thing where your your cheeks
all puff out. But that does other things
to you, too, as as well, where it
can impact cognitive abilities, vision,
something called spaceflight-associated
neuro-ocular syndrome. It's a long way
of saying everybody feels different. And
to give you the book ends, your
best-case scenario for your first call 3
to 5 days in space is you feel like
you're hanging upside down in your bed
like endlessly. Like that's that's just
the best case scenario for your first 3
to 5 days.
The other end of the spectrum, which
unfortunately impacts about 50% of
people, is it's like horrific motion
sickness. And it has nothing to do with
your susceptibility to motion sickness
on Earth. I mean, you could be, you
know, a hardcore test pilot, air show
pilot, used to being upside down, doing
flips and rolls.
>> And you were And you were a pilot,
right, before on Earth. Still a pilot.
>> Yes, still a pilot. Yeah. Um yeah, I was
in the lucky 50% that it feels like
you're hanging upside down from your
bed.
But but in both my missions, 50% of the
crew did not feel well and this has been
the case since the beginning of our
space program. But you know what I'll
say is it's worth it. It's worth it for
you know, one of the greatest views ever
to see our planet from that perspective
and and to get a sense of the the solar
system around us let alone the galaxy
and the universe. I mean, we are we are
a we are a speck of sand
in the grandest fastest desert
imaginable and
and it's just such an exciting
extraordinary journey to think about
because we've really only just begun.
Did it change your perspective on Earth
to see it from like people people talk
about that sense of sort of
you know, coming back to Earth and
feeling differently about the planet?
Did you have that? So what you're
referring to is the overview effect.
>> The overview effect.
>> And um
and I'm I'm sure maybe some of my my
astronaut colleagues won't appreciate
some of my comments on this, but I
believe this was very very real
uh in a 1960s, 70s, 80s, you know, I can
only imagine, you know, when when Yuri
Gagarin went into space
and what he saw. I mean, just had to
have just just shocked him because we
really no idea what it would look like,
right? I mean, we you know, and and same
with the early Mercury and Gemini
astronauts. Look, we have high
definition video coming off the
International Space Station. I can tell
you, sir, it looks just like what you
would imagine.
>> okay. Well, now, so does that mean you
need to go to space to appreciate that
we shouldn't, you know, fight wars over
lines that were drawn on a map a century
ago or or not, you know, dump toxic
waste in our oceans or something? You
don't need to go to space to know that.
To me, what I found most impactful
was when I saw the moon unexpectedly
rise from around Earth and it was like
how how could we not gone back in so
long? Like we took the first small step
on what I think is the greatest
adventure in human history and then we
stopped. Um now thankfully we're on the
return. Uh President Trump created the
Artemis program during his first term.
He just created a
uh an unbelievable national space policy
said that said go back and build the
base and stay and then press on to Mars.
So like we're getting in the right
direction, but when I was up there both
times I was
I mean I was certainly in awe of what I
saw, but I I I mean discouraged in a way
that we began this adventure and then
stopped. Um but now we're we're back in
motion again. Okay, let us talk about
that. So we're I'm going to try and go
from the close by to the further out.
Like the plan, the moon, then Mars, and
then then bigger questions. Um so tell
me about the Artemis mission. What is
Artemis going to do if all goes well?
Yeah, so for I think the first thing to
to emphasize right now and not to take
away from the mission that's coming up
is the president created the Artemis
program. And the Artemis program will
live on. It is more than any one mission
or one vehicle architecture. So uh you
see on the pad at launch complex 39B
there is SLS out there. So that's our
space launch system.
>> Yep. And when you look at it, you'll
look at it and say, does that kind of
look like space shuttle? It's kind of
not really. Yes. Why? Because the solid
rocket boosters have heritage from the
space shuttle program. The the center
core draws influence from the external
fuel tank from the shuttle. Heck, the
engines that are on it are from the
space shuttle. So this is where we
begin.
And that vehicle uh for Artemis 2 when
it launches, it's going to it's going to
accelerate those four astronauts to
near Earth escape velocity, 25,000 miles
an hour past the moon, back around uh
safely to Earth, and we're going to test
out our vehicle for subsequent missions
that will eventually lead to a landing.
But I'll tell you uh because that
program draws on such uh uh, such
history, has contractors, hundreds of
subcontractors, tens of thousands
people, it's expensive. It's not the
vehicle that you are going to take to
and from the moon a couple of times a
year as you build out a moon base the
way the president wants, the way the
national space policy calls for it. But
it's the way you you initially get back,
um, and uh, and we're going to do that
on Artemis 2, we're going to do it on
Artemis 3 and 4 and 5 and maybe 6, who
knows. We're going to get our astronauts
back to the surface, we're going to
learn and we are going to gradually roll
in some of what you're seeing today from
some of our commercial providers when
when vehicles are coming back and
landing on ships and landing on land
because that's what makes it more
affordable and that's how we take
frequent, um, you know, uh, repeatable
missions to and from the lunar
environment and build out the moon base
and actually go there to stay. So, what
does the moon base do?
What is it for?
So, we have been operating on the
International Space Station now, um, a
continuous human presence for more than,
uh, a quarter of a century. What an
accomplishment. I mean, you know, look,
we are hoping, uh, our our astronauts,
uh, who many of them are very trained,
uh, scientists and engineers will crack
the code on the orbital economy at the
International Space Station. Who knows?
Cancer-fighting drugs, biotech
technology, maybe we all 3D print a a
spare liver kidney and put it in the the
fridge someday. Who knows? But, um,
but what I would We'll come back Yeah, I
want to come back to the orbital
economy. Yeah.
>> uh, but but I want to point out that
that is a very different environment in
lower Earth orbit than what we may stand
to learn on the moon, right? So, you
have a lot of protection, approximately
420 km is the is the orbital altitude of
the International Space Station. You get
a lot of protection there from
radiation, you get a lot of protection
there from, uh, micrometeoroids and
orbital debris,
um, because at that altitude it starts
to decay and burn up in the atmosphere
quicker. So, meaning we have kept
astronauts alive in an incredibly harsh
environment of space, but literally in
the safest place you could have put
them, right? The moon changes the game.
You're not an hour and a half away from
being in the water if something goes
wrong. You're days away from coming back
to being in the water if if if something
goes wrong. There is no atmosphere or or
magnetosphere there to protect the
astronauts from
from solar vents like radiation that
could be really horrific. So, the moon
gives us an environment to build out you
know, habitation that can keep our
astronauts alive in a far more demanding
environment. Gives us the opportunity to
work with resources away from Earth for
in situ resource manufacturing and
refining.
We can make propellant out of ice.
Things that we're going to need to do to
get to Mars someday and bring our
astronauts home from Mars. So, it's a
it's a next level proving ground. Does
it have to be underground? Like what
does the moon base look like physically?
Okay, so this is a good question because
people ask me this and sometimes
we have a habit of jumping to the dream
state. You know, this this this amazing
dome right with all this like you know,
vegetation being grown in it inside it,
right? It's going to look like a
junkyard for a while. I mean just set
expectations here. We are going to land
lots of low cost rovers and landers and
set up common antennas. Those rovers are
going to burn out after after you know,
maybe a single lunar lunar night. And
and that's okay because we have to learn
and we have to learn in a inexpensive
way
to get the data to inform our future
architecture. So, yeah, for you know,
what? For the first maybe I don't know,
10 years it's going to look like a
pretty cool futuristic junkyard with
lots of lots of landers and and rovers
around. But someday someday that will
evolve as the cost to put mass on the
lunar surface goes down into some pretty
pretty cool infrastructure. And but so
over those 10 years just help me imagine
it. It's something where there would be
a continuous human presence in that in
that world, but it's a few astronauts
going back and forth constantly or That
will evolve, right? So, there's the it
will not start that way. Like we we will
it's certainly not in the early Artemis
missions when we are using an
architecture that is extremely
expensive, but over time, yes, we will
be able to undertake repeatable
affordable missions to moon. That's what
the president envisioned with his
enduring presence. So, there will be
some crossover point where I can almost
guarantee you that there will be
astronauts living and working in lunar
environment continuously.
>> Continuously. So, maybe 5 to 7 years
hypothetically on your I would say let's
let's see what happens over the next
decade. A lot is going to depend on
industry. I mean look, we haven't been
back to the moon in more than a half
century. This is super hard. You know,
sending astronauts to
the International Space Station in lower
earth orbit, 1.8 million pounds of
thrust. Sending them to the moon, 8.8
million pounds of thrust. That's
complicated and hard. We need industry
to be able to do it for us
inexpensively, routinely, and then yes,
we can have an
a continuous presence. I don't think
we're going to put them under ground in
it so much as I wouldn't be surprised if
we use rovers to try and cover some of
our infrastructure in lunar regolith uh
for additional
>> What is lunar regolith? Uh basically the
the materials uh the on the surface of
the on the surface of the moon. Taking
that and using it to cover some of our
uh infrastructure be a good way to
provide uh debris protection and
radiation protection. Does NASA have
enough money
to do this? Yes. Yes. Under current So,
the as with other areas of the federal
budget, the Trump administration
proposed cuts to NASA. Congress is not
doing those cuts. Are you happy overall
with the money that NASA has to spend? I
think Well, first of all, yes, I'm very
happy with the resources available to
us, but I just want to clarify because
it it it's not as simple as, you know,
did the did the president want to take
take you know, cuts to NASA and did
Congress, you know, work this out. The
The president created an incredible
national space policy and his one big
beautiful bill, you know, the Working
Families Tax Cut Act, you know, was one
of the most significant financial
plus-ups to NASA in decades. I mean, he
billions of dollars to invest in our
exploration programs and the
infrastructure required um you know, for
the moon plus in enhancing our
infrastructure for terrestrial
infrastructure across our centers. So,
to be clear, the president loves space,
created the Space Force, created the
Artemis program, returned human space
flight to the United States after hiatus
when we had to send our astronauts to
space through Russia
after the shuttle was retired. That
said, do I do do I have any fault that
you know, through the budgeting process
we were asked to take a closer look at
how we spend things, get things more on
track, on budget? I don't fault that at
all. That's a good forcing function to
take a close look at how we operate. And
and like all government agencies, we're
not we're not good capital allocators.
We could do better, and we are trying to
do that right now. And if we can within
our resources, within our budget, 25
billion a year, yeah, we can do some
pretty extraordinary science and
discovery. But, it seem it does seem
like in the optimal scenario where you
are establishing a permanent presence on
the moon, you're going to need a larger
budget. And is it something where you
feel like
each technical success, the success of
the Artemis mission, that success
generates support for more spending? Is
that how you envision it? Well, I think
that with every win we earn more trust
from all our stakeholders, our
workforce, the American public,
Congress, OMB, the president for sure.
Now,
I I will say again, I visited every one
of our centers. I mean, we've been
running you know, 18-hour days for the
last 2 months since my confirmation
getting our hand a handle on things. I
don't think we have a shortfall in
resources. 25 billion is an awful lot of
resources.
>> not going to get us to Mars though,
right? I'm not I'm not trying to push
you into demanding more money. I'm just
trying to calibrate. Just to give you a
sense of the Manhattan Project, adjusted
for inflation, was $30 billion. And we
really knew nothing there about that at
the time. We had to build factories
across the country for, you know,
enriching uranium, plutonium production
reactors. I'm just saying that people
have at times thought think that like a
billion is not a billion anymore. $25
billion with some of our one big
beautiful bill plus-ups like we can do
an awful lot. You know, one of my recent
interviews, you know, was with the head
of an AI company and, you know, the
amount spent on data centers for AI is,
you know, extraordinary. And so I just,
I have that in the back of my mind as
perspective. So is it safe for
astronauts to go to the moon? I ask
[clears throat] in part because you had
some really critical words about NASA's
failures on a recent mission, the
Starliner project. And I'm just
wondering just even in terms of public
support for NASA, how essential is it
that the safety of astronauts be
paramount versus how important is it for
people to just live with the reality of
risk and the possibility of death?
So I I do think that it's impossible to
undertake our mission, explore the
worlds beyond ours without taking some
risk. Now, I do think we have a
responsibility to drive risk,
you know, down to the greatest extent
possible. In order to do that, you need
to fully understand it. What am I
dealing with right now? And that's why
we have test and qualification programs.
Okay, we found something, we don't like
it, we can't make it go to zero. How do
we mitigate to the great extent? How do
we get comfortable with it? That's that
should be inherent in how we operate as
a space agency. But I will say at some
point or another you do have to you do
have to go.
My comments
reflect culture that I've grown up in
between flying high-performance
aircraft, going to space twice, which
is,
you know, you debrief your successes and
your failures, your shortcomings, your
mistakes. You understand it and then you
communicate by it. And by doing that, it
instills confidence with every every
person in the room and everyone else who
depends on those missions to be
successful because you understood what
you got wrong. If you don't do that, if
you pretend mistakes never happened at
all, then you invite them to happen
again and I don't know how we can ever
get comfortable with that. So, I did not
use the press conference, you know, to
to bash Boeing about building a bad
spacecraft or how we let these qualify.
Look, this is hard.
You know, the the Russians are still
flying essentially the same spacecraft
for more than
a half century. You know, not a lot of
countries have built a vehicle that can
take humans to and from space
successfully. It it it is hard.
We played a role in why that spacecraft
was was built the way it was, but but
worse in my mind and that's where I
chose to concentrate my my energy on is
that we did not own our shortcomings. We
didn't declare a mishap a mishap when we
should have done it and we didn't have
accountability when those
bad decisions were made and we didn't
have the right leadership that should
have stepped in at the time when it was
clear that we were going off course to
correct that course trajectory.
And that's what we called attention to.
So, really I think it's imperative that
that story was told before we step into
sending our astronauts around the moon,
before we start landing astronauts on
the moon and building a moon base. Do
you think that the Challenger disaster,
which was my primary childhood encounter
with the space program and then the
Columbia disaster later,
do you think those created a kind of
overhang of skepticism around the space
program that needs to be overcome by
Artemis?
No, I
Look, I
I think the American public, the
space-loving public from around the
world should understand that we cannot
undertake missions like this without
without accepting some risk and there
there will be there will be bad days and
that's unfortunate,
but it's applicable to our people that
undertake dangerous jobs every single
day, flying off aircraft carriers,
diving under the sea, working in nuclear
power plants. These things are not
without risk and certainly,
you know, uh you know, it accelerating
human beings on a controlled explosion
into space where there's no atmosphere,
no breathable air, and
you know, the the everything coming from
the sun and the debris around you is
trying to kill you. Yes, it's a
dangerous environment. And there are
scenarios like the past uh you know,
you know, catastrophic events where
people say at times that made NASA too
risk-averse.
Um and maybe so in in some cases.
Um and then there are situations like I
saw with Starliner was what are we doing
here? You were continuing to take risks
that you don't understand and by failing
to communicate and acknowledging where
we got things wrong, you were inviting
it to happen again. You were sending a
message to the workforce that in this
environment failure is an option and
it's and it's not. And that needed to be
fixed.
All right, so let's talk about the
private side of space exploration. Um
the role of private industry. You
mentioned public-private partnerships
and government contractors. You have a
pre-existing relationship with Elon Musk
and in fact your accession to this job
was delayed for a little while when Musk
and the president had a falling out. I
think people perceived that to be closer
relationship than reality.
>> Maybe maybe yeah, perceived. Let's say
there was a perceived delay
um or a perceived falling out. But
regardless, um Musk, I guess I'll say
Elon cuz everyone says Elon, Elon has
his own vision around the moon for
SpaceX. He's recently said that SpaceX
is
pivoting from, you know, trying to do a
direct Mars mission soon to aiming at
the moon. What is the overlap in the
relationship there? Are these sort of
separate track projects? Is there going
to be a SpaceX moon base and a NASA moon
base? Like how does how does NASA and
SpaceX actually fit together?
Well, I would just say, I mean, since
the 1960s, NASA doesn't undertake these
kind of world-changing endeavors alone.
We we always have gone after it with
industry. I think sometimes just because
there's new names now like Blue Origin
and SpaceX, that there's this impression
that, you know, this is this is like a a
whole new approach to going to space.
No, I mean, in the 1960s, it was Boeing
and McDonnell Douglas, and many of those
names still exist today.
Um and then we have new names. And some
of those new names are SpaceX and Blue
Origin and Stoke and Rocket Lab and all
these. And I'm But they are. I mean,
just they are actually sending
astronauts and rockets up themselves
privately in a way that was not
happening in 1968.
>> Oh, for sure. I mean, I that's how I
went to space twice with with with
SpaceX. So, sure, capabilities I would
expect to evolve over a half century. We
were the only game in town 60 years ago
when we created this whole thing of
space exploration, and we, you know, we
cracked the code at NASA on the near
impossible. We hand things off to
industry where there's clearly demand
outside of, you know, one and outside of
a single agency like NASA, and let a
market develop. Um
this is good for us. It allows
competitive forces to do their thing and
make products, capabilities better and
at lower cost. So, that's that's fine. I
I'll just tell you this is a good thing
for us. Both SpaceX and Blue Origin are
under contract to build the landers that
will take uh American astronauts back to
the surface of the moon. And if you can
build those landers, they're going to be
able to use it to bring lots of cargo. I
mean, maybe a
100 tons of mass down to the to the
lunar surface. I mean, we're going to be
able to build out a base um you know,
pretty quickly with those type of
capabilities. You know, we we are in a
race right now against uh a rival, the
Chinese. Their path is very similar to
the approach we took with Apollo. So,
you know, and and look, we don't have as
much schedule available uh as we did in
the 1960s in hindsight where we had, you
know, near infinite time to get to the
moon compared to the Soviets. In this
case, we this could come down to a a
year or two. What I'll say though is
just we spent 4 and 1/2% of our
discretionary budget in the
to build out these extraordinary
capabilities for for the good of
America, for humankind to go to the moon
and back. Right now, we're a quarter
percent and it's it's in large part
being supplemented by folks like Jeff
Bezos and Elon Musk willing to throw
resources well in excess of what we've
contracted them to do to provide a
capability that someday could enable us
to go to Mars. But is your expectation
going forward that Musk, Bezos, anyone
else who gets in the game, they will
always be working in partnership with
NASA in some way? Or is there a future
where, you know, there is a kind of
privatized, like actual privatized space
exploration where there are bases being
built and other things being done, space
stations and so on that are just
separate from the US government?
>> This is a This is a new domain where it
should be NASA's job to take on the
hardest engineering challenges. Again,
to to attempt to achieve the near
impossible. When we figure it out, we
hand it off to industry and see if a
market develops. Look, there was a time
when the army flew our mail, right? So,
if you're asking me like initially, I
think it's going to be NASA astronauts
that are stepping off the spaceship on
on the moon. I think it's going to be
NASA astronauts that are helping
construct the initial lunar base and
doing a lot of the initial scientific
research. Is there a world thereafter
where SpaceX and Blue Origin and others
are doing direct missions to the moon
for commercial or or even tourism
reasons? Totally. That would be a great
day because it would mean NASA's cost to
go into that environment have would have
decreased materially.
But you know what that we do then? We
set our sights on Mars. And we do things
that industry is not capable of doing
like building nuclear power and
propulsion spaceships, which is actually
a component of President Trump's
national space policy. I don't think
even with all the all the resources in
the world, uh you know, uh Blue Origin
or SpaceX or any of the others is going
to be in a rush to launch a nuclear
reactor into space. You know who does
that? NASA does that. When we do that,
we actually help industry make it
possible to undertake a mission to Mars
and explore the outer solar system.
Let's talk about what industry gets out
of space besides government contracts.
Um as yeah, as far as I know right now,
Elon Musk doesn't want to launch nuclear
reactors into space. He does seem to
want to launch data centers for
artificial intelligence into space. What
is the potential advantage of having
data centers in space? Is there one? I
would just say in terms of what is a
space or an orbital economy, it has been
like grossly overstated. So, we have
created a economy here on Earth that
that manufactures and builds things that
we launch into space, but in terms of
actually extracting more value out of
the unique environment of microgravity
than we put into it, we have not
developed anything in 60 years other
than launch observation and
communications.
And those are largely funded by
government customers. Now, over time,
it's expanded. So, you know, companies
that are doing Earth observation almost
as a service for whether it's
environmental, agriculture, or
intelligence DOW purposes, they have
customers now all around the world.
That's good. That's winning. Launch is
obviously the the healthiest with demand
from everywhere that it's ever been in
the history of the program. And coms,
that's a huge success story with
Starlink. That might be the only example
of like a true profitable program that
takes advantage of the unique
environment of of space that consumers
are paying for and creating value in
excess of what it costs to do it.
Amazing success story. Honestly, we
don't have anything else from it. All
the experimentation we've done in space
station, cancer-fighting drugs, like
again, like 3D printing,
you know, biotech, you know, Well, well,
but make it make it make it concrete.
Since to to a layperson, what is the
potential benefit of say doing medical
research in space? Like just literally,
why why is why is there potential there?
>> Sure. So, there's actually a way to
almost densify,
you know, cancer treating compounds
through crystal formulations that you
could not do on Earth.
>> Okay. Uh so, you know, gravity is really
helpful almost
uh all the time for us unless you fall
out of a tree, but there are certain
things that um that [snorts] you would
want to manufacture in a microgravity
environment, you think. We've been
experimenting with it on the
International Space Station. I can tell
you with all this industry that's
waiting around for you know, the silver
bullet that changes everything like we
cracked the code on a cancer free
treating you know, cancer drug that that
has to be formulated in space. You're
going to be seeing missions launch like
crazy. We're going to have lots of
commercial space stations up there. We
we hope for that day. It hasn't come
yet. So, again, like launch observation
and communication, there's real, you
know, broad-based demand for people can
generate a profit in in those markets.
Beyond that, we're not there. Maybe
these AI data centers can do it.
>> What would be again, as with the cancer
drugs, what does space do for a data
center? Why would you put a data center
in space?
>> Okay, so
>> Besides not having to do permitting in
you know, in in a US state.
>> It's it is energy. So, um you know, you
you mentioned before that hey, people
are throwing you know, crazy money at
building AI data centers. You you
brought this up in context of like
Manhattan Project and our space budget.
And um one, it's because they believe
that if you lose in this like you you
may never catch up. So, who's going to
be really the first to ultimately kind
of crack the code on
um on AI and as a result, they're
willing to spend to build massive data
centers and procure GPUs, but what does
it require? It requires power.
And um and we're at a massive deficit on
that. I mean, even our our last major
industrial nuclear power plant took like
15 years and 15 billion dollars for a
single gigawatt. Don't hold me to it,
but I think that's directionally right.
Um that's not going to work right now.
So, I I think what what SpaceX and
others are considering is well, we do
have an pretty incredible fusion reactor
up there.
Now, uh that's a good source of power.
That's not the end of the argument. Just
putting something up with solar arrays
doesn't solve the problem. Heat
rejection is a is a major issue in the
vacuum of space. But But you
theoretically can draw more energy from
the sun in space than on Earth. Is that
I mean, there's you Can you draw more
energy than in in space than you can on
Earth?
Uh Look, this is not conclusive, right?
There's energy conversion issues and
then, you know, are you are you beaming
uh beaming things back down to Earth?
Are you doing on-orbit processing?
Are there better locations that you
could potentially than pure just lower
Earth orbit, um you know, or more
creative orbits that might make this uh
project more feasible? I don't know. I I
Look, I think I think Elon Musk is uh
probably the greatest um engineer and
entrepreneur for the last, I don't know,
half century easy. He's obviously feels
pretty pretty strongly about his views
and I want it to work. I want it to work
for SpaceX and all the other companies
trying to figure out the orbital
economy.
>> Yeah, I mean, my
my core theory about space exploration
has always been that you need some kind
of commercial imperative woven in,
right? Like if you look at the age of
discovery right here on Earth, right?
It's not just people, you know, sailing
into the unknown for
the sake of human ambition, as important
as that is. It's also, you know, it it's
also about colonization and settlement,
but it's also about people looking for
ways to make money. And it seems like
space needs that to sort of draw human
energy upward on the scale that
certainly your vision has in mind. Are
there resources on the moon that people
would ever extract? Can you imagine that
happening? So, uh I think you By the
way, you just said a good
you know, good statement there on the
scale that we all imagine. That's so
key, right? I mean, do I think that you
know, the taxpayers, world governments
will always make some investments in
space for just, you know, the pursuit of
breakthrough discoveries that benefit
everyone? Sure.
But is that enough to fund three or four
space stations and a Mars outpost and a
lunar outpost? I I don't think so. So,
yeah, you're right. We we we need that
economic driver, you know, to remove or
reduce the dependencies on the taxpayers
to actually have the future that we all
imagine in space someday. There will be
breakthroughs. We just we don't know
what they are yet, but we are too early
on in this journey right now to think we
have it all figured out. Geez.
But, so but you would be
in the world where there's a moon base,
you would be essentially looking for
things on the moon.
>> Sure.
I I don't know anything on the moon
right now that's going to be easier and
more affordable to
mine, manufacture, and then bring back
to Earth than what we could make here on
Earth. And that includes helium-3. It's
not like it's in abundance on the moon.
Now, that people believe could be the
key to a more efficient fusion reaction.
Fusion reactors are inevitable. I have
no doubt. So, helium-3 will play a role
in it. It has a role potentially in
quantum computing. Certainly does have
in in various like nuclear detectors. Um
But, the point is like I don't have
anything immediate to point to you and
say this will make economic sense in the
moon other than this is directionally
correct. But, I am hopeful and I'm I
would guarantee we will find things
in space that will have enormous
economic value. Hell, I mean at at some
point in time or another we're going to
be mining asteroids. Like, that's
definitive. Like, I don't know if the
whole that asteroid's worth, you know,
you know, you know, 10 quadruple
trillions of dollars. But, yes, there's
real value there.
>> Tell me again, what is one thing you
would mine from an asteroid? I know
there's lots of possibilities, but just
for a layman who's trying to picture a
world where the dream of riches is
propelling companies and people into
space. What's a concrete example? Um
platinum. Okay. Good. That's a good
example. Perfect. Um so, the platinum
mines in the asteroid belt.
>> Yeah, I I look, I don't want to I don't
want to Everything is thrown off by
like like an abundance of supply the
moment you figure out how to capture
even a single
you know but for sure you were talking
about rare minerals
that are going to be in far greater
quantity than you would have on Earth
and and I don't think that that to me is
just inevitable I couldn't predict what
lifetime it's happening in that we are
actually capturing mining Right.
>> and then down massing those minerals
back to Earth or maybe it's even
manufacturing in space but at least that
you can reasonably predict is
inevitable.
>> And at some point politics enters into
this so you know you mentioned that you
know we're in a new mini space race with
China to see if we can get back to the
moon before they get there but we're not
in a world where
we're going to be fighting China for
territorial control of the moon anytime
soon right?
Oh I I look I
our job at NASA's really to think things
through and like the peaceful
exploration of science and discovery
right? And I don't think that there is
anything on the moon right now that's
worth taking up arms over right? Now
look there is there is you know
interesting real estate that we care
about that's up there they care about
where there could be ice to work with is
that something you go to war with over
the moon I don't think so but it's
certainly not lost on us that the high
ground has always been of strategic and
even tactical significance since the
beginning of humankind thankfully we
have a space force space force a
department of war to kind of be out on
the hill looking out for us as we
undertake our mission
you know in the again pursuit of
peaceful science and discovery
you know and and and China for example
they they blur those lines you know they
don't really separate their version of
NASA from their kind of military focus
in space so that's something we're you
know keenly aware of. Okay. Yeah. But
the war can wait for the asteroid
>> Yeah we don't the asteroid mining wars
of 2174.
You know I at least with the I mean we
we have to be real that, you know, when
when you take the people out of the
equation, you know, is is space a a
military domain? Absolutely, right? But
at least when the people have been
involved, even going back to the
Apollo-Soyuz program, you know, those
relationships in space, what they're
doing there from a scientific
perspective, transcended politics and
geopolitics on Earth. I would hope that
would continue. How do we get to Mars?
So, getting to the moon will certainly
help us get to Mars. During my hearings,
people were like, "How can you talk
about parallel tracking moon to Mars?
That makes no sense. We have no budget
for it." Of course it does. Said simply,
if you can send a lander to the moon,
when you see
um American astronauts step foot off a
lander onto the lunar surface, we have
the capability to send lots of mass to
Mars, period. Now,
there's a whole habitability thing, you
know, keeping them alive on a couple
days to the moon is very different than
keeping people alive 6 to 9 months going
to Mars. It's very different to land on
1/6 gravity versus 1/3 gravity, without
an atmosphere versus with an atmosphere,
and then how do you bring them home?
Right? That's the real hard part. This
is where nuclear power and propulsion
comes in.
Uh obviously, a huge proponent of it.
I've written op-eds on the subject. We
will get America underway before the end
of the president's term with nuclear
power propulsion space. It'll be an
extraordinary demonstration. Kind of
excited to talk about it in the kind of
months ahead. That's a game-changer for
the speed of getting to Mars or our
ability to get back or both? Uh
it's a it's a game-changer, in my
opinion, for our ability to come home.
It is not necessarily a faster way to
get there. So,
when you think of nuclear electric
propulsion, I I don't want you think of
airplanes, I want you think of trains.
Like, well, is that the way I want to go
across the country? Maybe not me
personally, but if I need to move a lot
of coal or steel or iron, yeah, that's
the way to do it. NEP allows us to move
lots of mass
across
you know really across our solar system
and the farther you get away from the
Sun the more relevant it is. So will NEP
increase reliability for moving lots of
mass and potentially even people to Mars
absolutely. When you get to Mars now you
have an energy source on the surface
which you can use to make the propellant
on Mars to bring your astronauts home.
It's imperative. The alternative is
you're literally setting up endless
football fields of solar panels that are
going to get covered in in dust and
debris and and then you're going to have
to rely on the robots to go out and
clean them like we're starting to ask
for a lot more miracles here versus can
a nuclear reactor lots of nuclear
reactors embedded in some of these
landers give us the power source to make
propellant on on Mars and bring them
back. Yes.
Could you go do
you know uncrewed missions in the outer
solar system past you know where the the
sun past the point of the sun's utility
learn something and actually come home
without having to refuel? Yes.
That's pretty exciting technology. So
what's the timeline for that tech? We're
going to we are going to do a
demonstration by the end of 2028.
>> Okay. We are going to send something on
under nuclear power propulsion space.
>> And then what's a I I know this is
prediction is impossible but what is a
best case timeline for an actual manned
Mars mission if things go well?
I think we would have to put a concerted
effort in first of all Everything
everything there's political will behind
it the tech is there.
>> 10 years. 10 years. 10 years there's a
issue in 2030s. Yeah. So something
something that we could see Yes.
certainly. I would think in our lifetime
we're going to see it happen to your
point like what's the will how many how
many resources are we able to really
focus all of our best and brightest all
of our energy and resources on that
important objective is commercials
capabilities mature enough have we
evolved our nuclear capabilities
but yes I think if we put our effort to
it we'll see it in our lifetime could
even be in 10 years. How important is
the human element in these missions cuz
I you know we keep gesturing to AI. I
think one of the assumptions that a lot
of people working in artificial
intelligence make is that AI
revolutionizes spaceflight, but in part
because it lets you send artificial
intelligences deep into space where
human beings can't go.
Um we obviously already do that with
robots, but
how yeah, how important is it that it's
actual human beings who are making these
leaps?
>> They're both important for
some overlap on missions and some just
very different. So, um look, if our
sensor capabilities now are so so good,
so much better than they they ever were
even a decade ago that when you send a
probe, um you know,
to let's say the outer solar system or
we have a mission we're talking about to
mean it to Venus potentially, it's going
to gather so much information so quickly
that
you know, by the time you you send the
data back to Earth through transmission
delays, allow it to be analyzed, send
your next command back of go investigate
this or send me more information on
that, you will have wasted an incredible
opportunity. So, you're going to have to
take advantage of all of that all of
that data you're gathering for like
literally on mission or on orbit
processing, determine what you just
found or learned or what problem you
encountered, fix it, move on, and then
send your status report back home. This
is inevitable.
Especially now when you talk about crude
missions, you know, going to Mars, you
have 20-minute plus transmission delays,
you're going to have to rely on on AI in
that crude environment
for just on-orbit decision-making
problem troubleshooting. But I do think
the human is important on missions that
they're capable of undertaking. Let's
take Mars. Look, I think there's been
three or four public announcements one
point or another that it's like, "Hey,
we've looked at this data, we've
analyzed it from this sample. There's a
good chance that there was you know,
microbial life here maybe at some point
in time or another. There's been a long
time.
>> Yeah, I feel like that has been
underplayed in the news because we have
so many other things to cover, but yes.
>> been going on for for decades, right?
This isn't like one single news release
on this. It's been going on for decades,
right? And um
you know, I think there's plenty of
scientists at NASA that are brilliant
that would say, "Look, I'm 99% sure that
at some point there was microbial life,
right?" So, short of like literally
having a camera that sees something
squirming around uh and beaming that
back home, which we we've never seen, to
be extremely clear on on the subject, no
one is going to believe it.
>> just just outside the frame.
>> like even under a microscope, you see
something moving, I think people would
be like, "Okay, that's real." But but
short of that, and again, we have not
seen that, I think the only way you're
going to you're going to have that
consequential discovery is astronauts
are going to go there, or they're going
to bring those samples back, or even
maybe a robotic mission will bring them
back, and then we're going to put them
under a lab here, and somebody's going
to come out and say conclusively, "Hey,
this is this is 100%, right?" So so this
is why you need a human in the loop on
some of these things. Not to mention,
it's just inherent in who we are. It's
our destiny. We're curious. We want to
go out and learn and discover. That's
how we evolve. And is it consequential
life on Mars in part because it suggests
that we could live on Mars?
I think it just answers the question
that may that we're not alone. How many
of your your friends you've ever, you
know, you look up at the stars and have
the conversation like, "Do you think
there's life out there?" And I bet most
people would say that like, "Oh, I mean,
we got 2 trillion galaxies, and every
galaxy has who knows how many stars in
it." So, sure, the odds suggest that
there should be something out there,
right? Well, does that change from like,
"Surely it must be somewhere" to "If you
find samples that support it on Mars and
signatures on Europa Clipper" to "What
if it's everywhere?"
Right? I mean, that that that's kind of
the the the the light switch moment that
could happen when you start finding, you
know, evidence of life on some of our
closest neighbors within our solar
system, which is one star across the
broader Milky Way galaxy, which is part
of two trillion others.
>> But so there's a dark interpretation
that with that, which is you realize
life is everywhere, and yet we haven't
heard from other civilizations, we have
no evidence of advanced civilizations
anywhere else in our galaxy. Um and
there are people
>> that's
>> civilization, advanced or not. We have
no evidence of life, direct evidence of
life.
>> No no direct evidence. And there's a lot
of smart people who've looked at that
and said, "Well, maybe that means that
there is what, you know, the term, I
think it's from uh the economist Robin
Hanson, that there's a great filter,
right? That basically it's so hard to
become a multi-planetary species that
even though life is everywhere,
all every species gets stuck somewhere
around where we are, achieving some
things, and then never sort of getting
off our initial planet. Does that worry
you, that possibility that there's just
some limit that we're going to hit in
terms of our ability to get off Earth?
No. I I mean, I don't I think this great
adventure that we are on, again, we are
It is our destiny to go venture out and
explore and discover, and moon is a next
stop, Mars, we're going to have an
outpost, and we will continue to evolve
our capabilities until we have the
ability to explore other star systems
beyond beyond our solar system. I
acknowledge that there are a lot of
factors in humankind's limited
history relative to the age of Earth
that yes, we could have destroyed
ourselves before we ever had the
opportunity, right? Um so so like the
the idea that we haven't had we don't
have any evidence of intelligent life
out there that's been able to reach out
or or um or communicate [snorts] with us
does not have me discouraged at all.
Look, we're only a a hundred plus years
into our industrial revolution here
where we even remotely have the
capability to detect something, let
alone our ability to communicate out
there. And by the way, space is It's
big. Now, I think that, you know,
>> Space is big, but it has been around.
It's big, but it's also pretty old,
right? And a universe where there that
was teeming with life would presumably
have
generated some other industrial-level
civilizations,
you know, a million years ago, 10
million years ago, right? No, we don't I
mean, we don't
>> That could have sent probes and No, we
have no idea in that like what I mean,
for all we know the most advanced, uh,
you know, planet, uh, you know, life
that's out there could be, uh, a water
planet filled with dolphins that can't
construct a rocket or something. Like we
don't like you So, it could be right,
but but that but that is back to that's
a kind of human exceptionalism, right?
Where you say the universe could be
teeming with life, but our particular
kind of life is sufficiently unique that
you don't get lots and lots of
intergalactic civilizations.
>> you think about the the scale of the
universe, uh, right now with how many,
like we said it before, you got two
trillion galaxies plus that are out
there. Every galaxy's got, you know, who
knows how many stars in it, how many of
them have potentially habitable planets.
Like we don't we can't put a a ceiling
on anything and we can't we couldn't
possibly appreciate what could be more
evolved than us. Other than look, there
are things we know based on our
understanding of physics today. There is
a cosmic speed limit, right? Uh, so if
you can't travel faster than light,
look, there's you know, what are the
odds that you would have uh, some sort
of an advanced species be able to arrive
in a star system to a planet at a time
when that life um, would have reached a
point that we would consider intelligent
life. It's It's like at this stage it's
near impossible to imagine that. We have
literally just dipped our toe in the
grandest sea of all and we we we haven't
even begun to understand what's in front
of us yet.
But you think human beings can become a
multi-planetary species? I I 100%. I I
was, uh, I was speaking to our, uh,
associate administrator yesterday, Amin.
I was like, you know,
you you imagine, uh, people at a time,
uh, you know you're going back many
thousands years ago that were hollowing
out a log to make their way across
essentially a pond and probably thinking
man I sure have it better than the guys
before who had to swim it right? I was
like when it comes to you know in our
present day at NASA and our capabilities
to even explore our solar system let
alone everything around us we're just
hollowing out a log. We're hollowing out
the log to try and get across
the river right?
>> Mhm. But somewhere out there there is
the equivalent of the oar or the sail
right in this metaphor and it seems like
you could say well that's going to be
when we figure out how to terraform Mars
or that's when we figure out we have a
telescope that tells us that there's a
habitable world that's X number of
light-years away and we figure out a way
to send human beings I'll just be in
cryosleep right to be science fictiony
about it but like when when you're when
you're imagining that beyond your
everyday duties as as NASA as as NASA
administrator are you imagining human
beings primarily colonizing the solar
system? Are you imagining us going into
deep space? What is what is the sail
Yeah.
>> or the oar that you're looking for?
>> No it's a good question. Look there are
a lot of things we are doing in parallel
right now. Sure we need to build
programs like habitable worlds
observatory which is actually work
that's that's being done here at Goddard
Space Flight Center so that we can look
out and try and identify exoplanets that
have biosignatures. You know start
building the picture have situational
awareness on like the the star systems
around us. That's a that's a good effort
but for the human track like what do we
need right now to continue this journey
make meaningful progress. What is you
know what is the sail and the oars?
Rapid reusability. I mean the moment we
stop throwing away our spacecraft and we
can do the equivalency of air-to-air
refueling in orbit changes the game on
the affordability to move lots of mass,
you know, whether it's to and from the
moon or Mars. That's a huge step.
Nuclear power and propulsion. One you
need to be able to efficiently move a
lot of mass there.
And then when you actually get the the
nuclear power and propulsion to the
surface, that's going to be your your
critical energy to power all the things
you want to you want to do there. But I
want to point out that's just the start
of the journey. A lot of people would
say like, "Well, NEP, you know, has
negligible improvements over
over solar under these circumstances or
whatever." Yeah, and I can tell you too,
if you go back to World War that there
was a lot of disadvantages on on a jet
fighter relative to a to a piston
airplane at the time. But you know, that
equation changed an awful lot in the the
80 years since. And we will get better.
We will get better at our power
conversion. We will run at higher
temperatures, which will decrease
a lot of our our our cooling radiation
requirements. We won't need, you know,
radiators the size of football fields.
So just getting in the in that motion,
that reps of moving things back and
forth, our capabilities will evolve.
We'll have our outpost on Mars, so we'll
learn to live away from Earth. We'll
know if we can live for extended periods
of time in you know, sub-1 G
environments. And we'll take that to
inform our next decision, which is why
again, it's important to have the
continuous situation awareness building
that our our telescopes give us.
I'm not necessarily in the camp of like,
should we be colonizing Mars? That's not
for me. I honestly that let the other
great brilliant dreamers do those
things. Do I think we should have an
outpost there? Should we get really good
at moving mass, materials, and people to
and from Mars? Totally. And then we need
the platinum mines to draw to draw the
colonists. Look, I we have to crack I'm
I'm
I'm not picking on any one particular
mineral cuz who knows what what changes
in the future. But I I we do need an
economic driver for sure.
Okay, last question. Just in the last 10
minutes you said repeatedly, "We don't
have any evidence of any civilizations
beyond Earth, let alone advanced
civilizations.
We're conducting this interview 18 hours
after President Trump, who you've
praised repeatedly in this conversation,
said that he was planning to declassify
material related to UFOs, what gets
called UAPs now. He described it as
something like a very complex and
interesting
topic.
Um
Does NASA have anything to declassify
that would be of interest to
viewers of this program? I'm not aware
of anything that we would have at NASA
to declassify other than say that I'm as
interested in um, you know, the
president's message as probably any
other space enthusiast out there. Now, I
will say having, you know, I I spent 10
years leading a defense contracting
company, you know, we we operated
fighter jets all across the country uh
simulating uh you know, bad guy
capabilities. Say, look, there are a lot
of, as you would expect,
um exquisite capabilities that we have
as a nation
uh for um you know, for national
security purposes that we have
developed. All we have to do is we look
through the history books, right? SR-71
was a pretty wild capability in the
1960s. Nobody, you know, nobody would
have imagined that. F-117 was pretty
wild. So, do I think that there are
probably capabilities we have as a
nation that we developed and our
adversaries that can do some pretty
impressive things, you know, um sure.
So, I wouldn't be surprised if that were
So, that puts you in the camp that says
a lot of the UAP UFO
sort of encounters and also sort of
vapors around it are
covers for human technologies.
I would uh yes, I would say generally
speaking, I think there are some that uh
I'm aware of that were very easily
explainable by uh not even phenomena.
Like, this was this was you know, a
weather balloon that at great range that
reflected. I I have I know those
conclusively. Um
I also know uh conclusively some of them
were were related to um, you know, test
programs that were that were out there.
I mean, look, people misidentified a lot
of what was flying in the uh, you know,
1960s and '80s um, you know, in the in
the middle of the desert with lights on
at night look strange. Turned out it was
B-2, turned out it was F-117.
Um, so I'm I'm not surprised that that
that could potentially fall into. I
would also ask people again, this is a
good you know, kind of Occam's razor
thing. If um, if there was intelligent
life that visited us from um,
another world, uh, where would you where
would you be interested in going to
observe us? I I mean, Times Square seems
like a good spot, the Las Vegas Strip
seems like a good spot. I mean, there's
got to be interesting areas. Why would
you always pick our naval bases? You
know, why would you pick off the coast
of Virginia or San Diego or Hawaii? Um,
that that probably signals it's more of
a national security interest, I would
say.
>> That that makes sense, although I will
say that there have been a number of UFO
reports related to nuclear facilities.
And you could imagine some reasons why
a extraterrestrial species would be
interested in our nuclear capacities. I
I could also imagine that
>> Or or even these capacities here.
>> Or again, uh, there's a lot of other
people that are interested in our, you
know, strategic deterrent as well. Um,
you know, I I I joke a little bit that I
say that uh, in my 60 days at NASA I've
I've certainly seen things that I I
can't explain, but they relate entirely
to uh, programs to build things that I
have no idea why we're doing
>> [laughter]
>> them, but not not aliens. All right, on
that refreshingly concrete answer, Jared
Isaacman, thank you so much for joining
me.
>> No, thank you. Great questions, I really
appreciate it.
>> [music]
>> Mhm.